---
title: "Data Governance is where Cybersecurity was Ten Years Ago"
summary: "Data Governance has a lot to learn from the field of Cybersecurity in gaining traction and buy-in."
---

Data Governance is where Cybersecurity was ten years ago. 

When I started university many years ago, one of the first things we learned about was cybersecurity. One notion that was repeated was this idea that cybersecurity people are fighting an uphill battle in getting buy-in from upper management. They told us that half the job consisted of convincing upper management that security is necessary and worthwhile enough to justify allocating resources. By the time I finished university I've seen how this landscape has changed. Now, more than ever, organizations are hiring for cybersecurity and both the respect and appeal of the field has markedly improved. I'm glossing over the details here, but the point is that the field of cybersecurity evolved itself over time, and that didn't happen by itself. 

When talking to colleagues about data governance, I hear a lot of the same issues that were talked about in my cybersecurity classes. The people within the field understand the value of data governance, but are routinely overlooked and underprioritized because the work is seen as something that is "nice to have". Ultimately, by the business side it's seen as a function that is bureaucratic, controlling, and something that bleeds the bottom line. The same complaints were heard in cybersecurity not too long ago. So how did cybersecurity evolve past this narrative, and what data governance as a field learn from it? 

Let's look at some of the things that drove the change in sentiment around security. For one (1), large breaches such as the Vaastamo case, Solarwinds, etc., certainly helped in making the (lack of) prioritization of security visible. Additionally (2), shifting the conversation from within-field metrics to business metrics. Cybersecurity specialists started talking about risk in terms of assets and financial loss instead of coverage and threats. They realised that elitism and techincal jargon won't get them heard. Language matters. How we say something has just as much impact on policy as what we say, which leads nicely into the last point: (3), cybersecurity rebranded itself culturally. The field became more heterogenous, including women and people from different professional backgrounds into the fold. This helped in washing out the stereotypes surrounding the field, expanding it beyond geeked-out techies. Moving security out of "IT" and involving it into the broader conversation at an enterprise level gave it respect. 

Now, while Data Governance does not have the benefit of massive breaches making headlines so that they can then say "we told you so", the field can learn a lot from how cybersecurity evolved. First, it is important that data governance takes credit where credit is due. My not-so-daring prediction is that we will hear some interesting success stories regarding AI initatives in the coming years, and that a most of them will be built on a solid data foundation. Data governance professionals should be vocal and not undersell their role in these stories. Second, these professionals have to learn to speak the language of their business. DG is full of jargon - which is fine when speaking between ourselves - but the business will never listen until you speak their language. Show the impact, talk in metrics used internally by the business. Lastly, data governance needs a rebrand. While it is relatively heterogenous in the sense that professionals in this field come from many different backgrounds, it is on the other hand saturated with seniors and bureacratics. Be more flexible, invite juniors to the conversation, and highlight the attractive elements of the field. 



